---
layout: post
title: "What \"Noise\" showed me"
subtitle: "The things I got from \"Noise\" by Daniel Kahneman, Olivier Sibony and Cass R. Sunstein"
date: 2021-11-28 00:00:00 -0400
background: '/img/posts/Noise.jpg'
---

Author: Daniel Kahneman, Oliver Sibony, Cass R. Sunstein \
Date Finished: October 8, 2021 → October 8, 2021 \
Genres: Business, Philosophy, Statistics 

# The Book in 3 Sentences

1. Noise is a far bigger factor in every human decision than we usually think
2. Noise is normal in decision making and can be reduced trough techniques. 
3. You can find out how much Noise a system has through an Noise audit. 

# Impressions

Noise is the randomness associated with every measurement taken. If you are doing statistics on a regular basis, you know the phenomenon that pretty much every measure you take, is noisy. Most statistics look at effects beyond noise and therefore ignore it completely. Really focussing on noise is not the goal of a process, designed to establish the truth of falsehood of a hypothesis. 

This book really changes that in a refreshing manner, and produces astonishing findings on the way. Noise is an inherent problem of measurement, which can already be hard in physics, but really is a mayor factor of every experiment of the social sciences. It is normal that most of the measurement taken is  noise and just a small part of the overall difference between groups can be explained by the experimental condition. 

What standard psychology does is then focus on the things it can explain while ignoring the large part of the phenomenon it can't. "Noise" shows that the part psychology cannot explain, still has significant value when it comes to decision making. 

"Noise" explains that most of every decision, taken by a person is noise. An that those are not only lightly decisions like what to eat for dinner, but decisions like prison time, medication, sickness, and insurance premiums. The book then explains how to find those noisy decisions and how to enact a protocol to make them less noisy.

## Who Should Read It?

Every person making important decision effecting others should read this book to clean up his decision making and work to reduce noise.

# How the Book Changed Me

- It made me aware of the randomness of human decision and really emphasised the danger of said randomness.
- It made me really aware how people want to defend their random decisions, and resent efforts of reducing bias and noise.
- The book made clear to me how much of every decision is influenced- if not outright decided by circumstance, and the book provides remedies to much of those influences.
- "Noise" made me aware that supressing noise is really hard and requires a very deliberate and thought out process. The process outlined in the book is quite hard to apply, and requires a lot of resources.

# My Top 3 Quotes

"Your judgement depends on what mood you are in, what cases you have just discussed, and even what the weather is. You are not the same person at all times."

"People believe they capture complexity and add subtly when they make judgments. But the complexity and the subtlety are mostly wasted — usually they do not add to the accuracy of simple models."

"Whenever there is prediction, there is ignorance, and probably more of it than we think. Have we checked whether the experts we trust are more accurate than dart-throwing chimpanzees?"