---
layout: post
title: "Sprint by Jake Knapp. A short review"
subtitle: "All the things I took home from this book."
date: 2021-10-08 00:00:00 -0400
background: '/img/posts/Sprint-Process-Transparent.png'
---
# Sprint

Author: Jake Knapp \
Date Finished: September 20, 2021 → September 25, 2021 \
Genres: Business, Productivity 

# ⛰ What It's About

Sprint is about the Sprint process, which is designed to create validated learning about a product within 5 days. The program archives this by assembling a team of max 7 people, giving them the roles of decider, Facilitator and participant. The Facilitator then guides the group through different exercises to get them from the idea stage, through information gathering, to building a prototype and in the end to testing a prototype to generate validated learning. 

# 🔍 How I Discovered It

The book got mentioned in the Book Inspired by Marty Cagan, as a way to change a company from old work principles to new work principles

# 🧠 Thoughts

The book gives clear instructions and is very applicable, which actually motivated me to do a Sprint just by myself. This worked fine up to day three, when it comes to prototyping and testing the product. I created a prototype but had problems testing the prototype, since I had to wait on approval of my amazon account. I will finish the validated learning when I have access to an Amazon merch account. 

The discovery techniques in the first three days of the Sprint are valuable tools, which I will use in future projects.

These Tools are:

### Setting long term goals and generating sprint questions

This is the first technique in the Sprint. It is a imaginary exercise that compels the team to dream about a desirable future and then contrasts this desirable future with the things that are likely to to make problems. These problems are then used to generate questions to answer for the sprint.

### Make a Map

Making a map of the product interaction helps the participants to be on the same page about the product and gives them a vocabulary to focus conversation. It also neatly defines the problem space which helps people to keep on track.

### Asking the Experts and How might we notes

In this step you write down problems by reformulating into how might we questions, while listening to experts in the field. ( I on  my own did some online research and generated how might we notes.) This helps people to get them into a solution orientated mindset when thinking about problems, and neatly generates a good estimate of probable failure modes.

### Lightning Demos

Three minute presentations looking at solutions from competitors or the own firm. I did look at competitors and it gave me a great overview of solutions used at the moment.

### The four step Sketch

1. Gather notes and organize them
2. Formulate ideas and rank order them
3. Crazy 8s. Make 8 simple sketches in 8 minutes
4. The final Sketch. Make one high quality sketch to show to your peers in 30 minutes. This sketch includes your best idea.

This exercise is great at reducing nebulas ideas down to one implementable idea.

It really drives down decision fatigue by forcing you to get something onto paper and then letting you iterate on it. The rapid iteration of the crazy 8s makes designs easy because they seem reversible. After doing the 8 sketches and seeing the different solutions next to each other, judging them becomes a lot easier.

### Make a storyboard

Create a storyboard by moving the sketches and drawing new one to complete the part of the customer experience you want to test.

### Prototype 

Create a prototype according to the storyboard.

### Test the Prototype

Test the prototype with real customers.

## What I Liked About It

Sprint has incredible actionable instructions down to the specific materials used in the sprint process. This really motivates me to test the Ideas myself. The idea creation methods are really great at getting one into a topic and then pushing one to the next step, there is no getting lost, which is great! 

## What I Didn't Like About It

Sprint sets out what it wants to do and does that really nicely. I could complain about things this book does not address, but the book is designed as a guide to the sprint week and does exactly that and not more. All In all I have nothing I did not like about the book.

# 📚 Related Books

The Lean Startup by Eric Ries 

Inspired by Marty Cagan

Zero To One by Peter Thiel

The Hard Thing About Hard Things by Ben Horowitz