---
layout: post
title: "A short summary of Deep Work by Cal Newport"
subtitle: "How to focus on the things that actually make a difference."
date: 2021-10-15 00:00:00 -0400
background: '/img/posts/deepvshallow2.png'
---

Author: Cal Newport\
Date Finished: October 13, 2021 → October 14, 2021\
Genres: Creativity, Life Advice, Philosophy, Productivity

# The Book in 3 Sentences

1. Deep Work is the ability to focus, distraction-free at the edge of your cognitive ability on a valuable task.
2. This is the most valuable work we can do and the work we should focus on.
3. Cal Newport gives tools and tricks to maximize the amount of Deep Work one can perform.

# Impressions

The book gives me a new lens to apply to my daily activities, and thus allows me to prioritize those activities in a more structured way. It gives valuable tools to improve productivity and is very practical in outlook, which is great, because it can be applied immediately. 

## How I Discovered It

I picked it up while browsing books in a bookstore, having heard of it somewhere, but I cannot recall where.

## Who Should Read It?

Anyone who is interested in the scientific research into meditation and in the effects of meditation.

# How the Book Changed Me

- I  plan every minute of my day, to discover distracted time, and keep on track.
- I reduced the amount of time spent on Social Media.
- I am now more aware of the problems of multitasking and try to avoid it.

# My Top 3 Quotes
> Networking tools are distracting us from work that requires unbroken concentration.

Cal Newport

> Like fingers pointing to the moon. Other diverse disciplines from anthropology to education, behavioral economics to family counseling, similarly suggest that the skillful management of attention is the sine qua non of the good life and the key to improving virtually every aspect of you experience.

Winifred Gallagher

> There is a popular notion that artist work from inspiration—that there is some strike or bolt or bubbling up of creative mojo form who knows where...but I hope [my work] makes clear that waiting for inspiration to strike is a terrible, terrible plan. In fact, perhaps the single best piece of advice I can offer to anyone trying to do creative work is to ignore inspiration.

Mason Currey
# Book Summary<br/>
<br/>

# Part One: The Idea

This section argues that Deep Work is important and valuable by emphasizing that deep work helps you gain the skills valued in the information economy. This is achieved by promoting the two core abilities for striving in the new economy: Mastering new hard things and the ability to produce at an elite level in terms of both quality and speed. The chapter gives a solid argument why you should invest a good chunk of your time into deep work and establishes the motivation for following the rules laid out in the second part of the book.<br/>
<br/>


# Part 2 The Rules<br/>
<br/>


## Rule 1 Work Deeply

This chapter is about the different ways Deep Work can be practiced. For this it explains different scheduling philosophies of Deep Work:

### The Monastic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

In this Philosophy you shout yourself against all distraction. People who practice this style do not have contact information available to anyone and focus all their time to distraction free work.

### The Bimodal Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

This Philosophy embraces a strict differentiation between Deep Work, and normal work. Blocking entire weeks or months just to focus on Deep Work are examples of this Philosophy.

### The Rhythmic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

In this Philosophy, you block certain times of your day to perform a regular session of Deep Work every day.

### The Journalistic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

This Schedule is founded on the ability to change between deep work and regular work on short notice and to squeeze deep work into ever free minute available to you. Newport emphasizes that this Schedule is not easy to learn and is most likely not for everyone.

After deciding how you want to schedule the deep work, Newport gives tips on how to actually do it.

### Create a Ritual

He emphasizes that you should have a thought out ritual which answers these questions:

- Where you will work and how long
- How you will work once you start to work
- How you will support your work  
<br/>


### Execute Like a Business

Newport recommends using "The 4 Disciplines of Execution" form the book with the same name.

- #1 Focus on the widely important
- #2 Act on Lead Measures
- #3 Keep a  Compelling Scoreboard
- #4 Create a Cadence of Accountability  
<br/>

## Rule 2 Embrace Boredom<br/>
<br/>

### Don't take Breaks from Distraction. Instead Take Breaks from Focus

This Chapter focuses on getting control over yourself to do the things you set out to do. For this Newport advises to always schedule internet time and to keep to this schedule. This is designed to train you discipline.

You further should work Intensively for a set amount of time since Newport believes that these intense sessions train the mind to give the right amount of intensity, which gets lost if you give into your distractions. Newport gives the example of memorizing a deck of cards as an example of how to challenge your mind with an intense problem, and describes the technique to accomplish such a task. 

One further tool is to Meditate Productively, which means that you define a problem before doing a meditative activity like walking or running, and then keep thinking about the problem during your activity.

## Rule 3 Quit Social Media

This whole chapter is what it advertises to be, it is there to convince you to quit social media. 

Newport emphasizes that a knowledge worker should choose his tools with the same care a craftsman would. For this he discourages: 

### The Any-Benefit Approach to Network Tool Selection:

You're justified in using a network tool if you can identify any possible benefit to its use, or anything you might possibly miss out on if you don't use it.

and Promotes:

### The Craftsman Approach to Tool Selection:

Identify the core factors that determine success and happiness in your professional and person life. Adopt a tool only if its opposite impact on these factors substantially outweigh its negative impacts.

Newport then dares you to quit social media for thirty days and then ask yourself:

1. Would the last thirty days have been notably better if I had been able to use this service?
2. Did people care that I wasn't using this service?

If you answer no to those questions, quit the service.

## Rule 4 Drain the Shallows

This chapter is focused on the reduction of shallow work and gives tools to first identify the shallow work you are doing and then reduce the shallow work.

### Schedule Every minute of your day

Newport believes that people overestimate the amount of time they are working and underestimate the amount of time they engage in distractions like social media or television. To make wasted time apparent and to focus on the things you actually want to spend your day on, Newport is suggesting this:

> At the beginning of each workday, turn to a new page of lined paper in a notebook you dedicate to this purpose. Don the left-hand side of the page , mark every other line with an hour of the day, covering the full set of hours you typically work. Divide the hours if your workday into blocks and assign activities to the blocks. ... Not every block need be dedicated to a work task. There might be time blocks for lunch or relaxation.
> 

This technique brings multiple benefits. 

1. It teaches you estimating work load by having you block the amount of time for each task, making the cost of every task apparent.
2. It makes you aware of time not spent on tasks written down in the list.<br/>
<br/>
3. Tasks can be rewritten, but rewriting them makes you think about your prioritization.
4. It gives you an overview of your spent time and therefore gives you insights on how to improve the efficiency of your work.

The next tool Newport touches is to:

### Quantify the Depth of every activity

This is archived by guessing how long you would have to train a person to do this task. 

This tool is designed to show you the parts of your work you should not do or outsource to concentrate on deeper work. 

 Which leads to the next technique:

### Asking your Boss for a Shallow Work Budget

This is designed to make your boss aware of all the things that take time but do not take the given expertise of your abilities, giving him an incentive to get you onto deeper work.

### Finish your work by Five Thirty

Work done late or at night is often sloppy, drains you for the next day, and is most likely shallow work anyway. 

### Become hard to reach

Make people who send you E-mail do more work by steering people to the right addresses (like your agent if you are an author) and expecting conditions when mailing you.

As an example is following massage given:

> If you have an offer, opportunity, or introduction that might make my life more interesting, e-mail me at interesting [at]  [calnewport.com](http://calnewport.com) For the reasons stated above, I'll only respond to those proposals that are a good match for my schedule and interests.
> 

This is done to increase quality and decrease quantity of incoming mail.

The second tip is to:

### Do More Work When You Send or Reply to E-mails

For this you should always ask this question when replying to mail:

> What is the project represented by this message, and what is the most efficient (in terms of messages generated process for bringing this project to a successful conclusion?
> 

 

# Concepts<br/>
<br/>

### Definition Deep work:

Professional activities performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities to their limit. These efforts create new value, improve your skill, and are hard to replicate.

### Definition shallow work:

Noncogitively demanding, logistical-style tasks, often performed while distracted. These efforts tend to not create much new value in the world and are easy to replicate. 

### The Deep Work Hypothesis:

The ability to perform deep work is becoming increasingly rare at exactly the same time it is becoming increasingly valuable in our economy. As a consequence, the few who cultivate this skill, and then make it the core of their working life, will thrive.

### Deep Work Formular:

High-Quality Work Produced = (Time Spent) x (Intensity of Focus)

### The Principle of Least Resistance:

In a business setting, without clear feedback on the impact of various behaviors to the bottom line, we will tend toward behaviors that are easiest at the moment.

### Busyness as a proxy for Productivity:

In the absence of clear indicators of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs, many knowledge workers turn back toward an industrial indicator of productivity: doing lots of stuff in a visible manner. 

